Add WAL documentation. Also fix some minor metrics registration details (#16270)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/upgrading/instructions/testing-experimental-raft-backend.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Testing the Experimental WAL LogStore Backend
description: >-
  Consul 1.15 introduced a new experimental storage backend option. Learn how to
  configure and test it out in a safe way.
---

# Testing the Experimental WAL LogStore Backend

## Introduction

Consul 1.15 introduced a new experimental storage backend. This guide explains
how to configure it and test it out safely. The new backend is called `wal` in
configuration.

> WAL is a acronym for "Write-Ahead Log". We called it this because it implements
> a traditional log with rotating, append-only log files. The current `LogStore`
> uses BoltDB which is a copy-on-write BTree which is less optimized for
> append-only workloads.
> 
> ~> The `wal` backend is considered **experimental** in Consul 1.15. Please test
> it safely in pre-production first and verify on a subset of servers in
> production using this guide before fully enabling it on all servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WAL implements a traditional log with rotating, append-only log files. The current `LogStore`
uses BoltDB, which is a copy-on-write BTree. BoltDB is not optimized for append-only workloads.

!>**Upgrade warning**: The WAL backend is experimental. You should test and verify the WAL backend on a subset of servers in pre-production before fully enabling it on all servers.
```
This is one of the designated uses for callouts per the style guide.

> ## Why build a new backend?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### WAL versus BoldDB
```
I think this is still part of the introduction. In fact, most of the information in this section, I would argue, isn't documentation and would be better suited to a blog article.

Author: I actually had `// TODO should this be in a blog?` right up until I posted the PR on this section. My main reasoning not to was just that I think this needs to live _somewhere_ and don't think a blog will be ready on release day so wanted to land it somewhere at least initially so the content is available.

I'll go back and look at timing to see if we can make a blog happen in time.

The WAL backend has been written to resolve some long-standing issues with the
current BoltDB backend. The existing BoltDB log store has worked reliably for
most users for years, however it is not the most efficient way to store
append-only logs to disk since it was designed as a full key-value database. It
was an expedient option when our raft library was first written and always
assumed we'd replace it with something more purpose-built.

Importantly, a BoltDB database is a single file that only ever grows. Deleting
the oldest logs which we do regularly when we've made a new snapshots of the
state, leaves free space in the file that needs to be tracked to be re-used on
future writes. By contrast a simple segmented log can just delete the oldest log

> files from disk. With BoltDB uses as a log, sudden burst of writes say three
> times larger than the normal volume can suddenly cause the file to grow to about
> several times it's steady-state size. After the next snapshot is taken, and the

Reviewer 2: This, until the end of the paragraph might be a bit confusing to digest.

```suggestion
files from disk. When BoltDB is used as a log backend, sudden burst of writes at a rate 2-3x higher than the normal volume, can suddenly cause the log file to grow to several times it's steady-state size. After the next snapshot is taken, and the
```

> oldest logs truncated again, the file is left as mostly empty space. Tracking

Reviewer 2: > the file is left as mostly empty space

shall we clarify that it keeps the same size?

this free space requires writing extra metadata proportional to the amount of
free pages to disk with every write and so after such a burst, write latencies
tend to increase - in some cases dramatically causing serious performance
degradation to the cluster.

> Even if this has never happened to a catastrophic degree in a cluster, the fact
> that it's a risk has meant that Consul has erred on the side of never letting
> too many logs accumulate in the LogStore. Significantly larger BoltDB files are
> somewhat slower in general because it's a tree and so still has log(N) work to
> do n every write. But out user's experience showed that the larger the file, the
> more likely it is to have a large freelist or suddenly form one after a burst of
> writes. For this reason, the default options for how frequently we make a full
> snapshot and truncate the logs, and for how many logs we keep around have always
> been aggressively set towards keeping BoltDB small rather than using disk IO the
> most efficiently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even if this has never happened to a catastrophic degree in a cluster, Consul was tuned to avoid for too many logs to accumulate in the LogStore, in order to reduce/mitigate the risk. Significantly larger BoltDB files are
somewhat slower in general because it's a tree and so still has log(N) work to
do n every write. But out user's experience showed that the larger the file, the
more likely it is to have a large freelist or suddenly form one after a burst of
writes. For this reason, the default options for how frequently we make a full
snapshot and truncate the logs, and for how many logs we keep around have always
been aggressively set towards keeping BoltDB small rather than using disk IO the
most efficiently.
```

Reviewer 2: Also:

> Significantly larger BoltDB files are
somewhat slower in general because it's a tree and so still has log(N) work to
do n every write. But out user's experience showed that the larger the file, the
more likely it is to have a large freelist or suddenly form one after a burst of
writes.

Do we mean that both (the fact it is a tree and the higher probability of freelist) are a reason of bad performances? Or that despite the good performances offered by the tree, freelists drags them down?

> because it's a tree and so still has log(N) work to do n every write
Did we mean `on every write`?

Reviewer 2: Also I am assuming that by `freelist` we refer either to chunks of free space in the file or to the data structures we use to track the free space in the file.

It is not mentioned anywhere else in the file so it might be worth a clarification.

> The WAL backend has been written to resolve some long-standing issues with the
> current BoltDB backend. The existing BoltDB log store has worked reliably for
> most users for years, however it is not the most efficient way to store
> append-only logs to disk since it was designed as a full key-value database. It
> was an expedient option when our raft library was first written and always
> assumed we'd replace it with something more purpose-built.
> 
> Importantly, a BoltDB database is a single file that only ever grows. Deleting
> the oldest logs which we do regularly when we've made a new snapshots of the
> state, leaves free space in the file that needs to be tracked to be re-used on
> future writes. By contrast a simple segmented log can just delete the oldest log
> files from disk. With BoltDB uses as a log, sudden burst of writes say three
> times larger than the normal volume can suddenly cause the file to grow to about
> several times it's steady-state size. After the next snapshot is taken, and the
> oldest logs truncated again, the file is left as mostly empty space. Tracking
> this free space requires writing extra metadata proportional to the amount of
> free pages to disk with every write and so after such a burst, write latencies
> tend to increase - in some cases dramatically causing serious performance
> degradation to the cluster.
> 
> Even if this has never happened to a catastrophic degree in a cluster, the fact
> that it's a risk has meant that Consul has erred on the side of never letting
> too many logs accumulate in the LogStore. Significantly larger BoltDB files are
> somewhat slower in general because it's a tree and so still has log(N) work to
> do n every write. But out user's experience showed that the larger the file, the
> more likely it is to have a large freelist or suddenly form one after a burst of
> writes. For this reason, the default options for how frequently we make a full
> snapshot and truncate the logs, and for how many logs we keep around have always
> been aggressively set towards keeping BoltDB small rather than using disk IO the
> most efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The WAL backend stores append-only logs to disk more efficiently than BoltDB because it is a full key-value database. A BoltDB database is a single file that continuously grows and deleting
the oldest logs leaves free space in the file that must be tracked to be re-used on
future writes. WAL is a simple segmented log that can delete the oldest log
files from disk. 

With BoltDB, a burst of writes can cause the file to grow exponentially. After taking the next snapshot and the oldest logs are truncated, the file is mostly empty space. Tracking
the free space requires Consul to write extra metadata proportional to the amount of
free pages to disk with every write. After a burst of writes, write latencies
tend to increase that cause serious performance degradation to the cluster.

Consul never lets too many logs accumulate in the LogStore. Large BoltDB files are
slow as a result of its tree structure. It requires additional work for every write. But large files tend to either have a large freelist or suddenly form one after a burst of
writes. For this reason, the default options for how frequently we make a full
snapshot and truncate the logs, and for how many logs we keep around have always
been aggressively set toward keeping BoltDB small rather than using disk IO the
most efficiently.
```
I think this is too much detail for a usage doc. Can't we just say that the WAL backend is more efficient for writing logs than BoltDB because it has a truncating mechanism more suitable to rolling logs than BoltDB? We can move the details to either a blog about the change or to the release notes.

Other reliability issues such as [followers being unable to catch
up](/consul/docs/agent/telemetry#raft-replication-capacity-issues) also stem
from this need to carefully balance the size of the BoltDB log store against how

> long snapshots take to restore - there is a simple solution to that issue if

Reviewer 2: We do not state the solution and the jump to WAL is not fully obvios. We could state the solution, clarify the technical issues to be solved before being able to use the approach (let file grow), something like:

> A simple solution for that issue is ... but could not get implemented unless/until letting logs grow ...

And then specify that WAL follows this approach.

letting logs grow much larger to ensure recovery didn't have a potentially
catastrophic impact on the cluster's write performance.

While not every user will experience a huge difference in performance, the WAL
backend avoids these performance concerns entirely. It is more performant when
directly measured due to solving a simpler storage problem than BoltDB was

> designed for. For example it can commit a single log entry with on fsync instead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
designed for. For example it can commit a single log entry with one fsync instead
```

Shall we use monospace? >  `fsync`

of two, and tends to write 2-3x fewer bytes to the disk to do it. The real
benefit though is that retaining more logs won't impact write performance at all

> and so reducing disk IO with slower snapshots or keeping logs around to catch up
> slower followers are all possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and so strategies for reducing disk IO with slower snapshots or for keeping logs around to permit slower followers to catch up with cluster state, are all possible.
```

   exhaustively simulate thousands of possible crash failure scenarios and test
   that WAL correctly recovered from each.
 * We ran hundreds of tests over a few weeks in a performance testing cluster
   with checksum verification enabled and detected zero cases of data loss or
   corruption. We plan to continue testing this continuously over the next few
   months too before making it the default backend.

However, we are well aware of both how complex and how critical disk-persistence
is for our user's data.

Our hope is that we will have many users at all degrees of scale try WAL in
their environments after upgrading to 1.15 and report success or failure back so
we have increased confidence before we make it the default for new clusters.

This guide describes how to safely try and verify it without risking the
availability of your cluster should there be a latent data-loss issue
discovered.

## Requirements

- All servers in the Datacenter should be upgraded to Consul 1.15 using the
  [standard upgrade procedure](/consul/docs/upgrading/general-process) and
  the [1.15 upgrade notes](/consul/docs/upgrading/upgrade-specific#consul-1-15-x).

> - You need a Consul cluster with at least 3 nodes to safely test the new

Reviewer 2: Is this enough?

We mention below that enabling WAL on a voting server might itself generate an issue:

> If you enable a server to use WAL using Consul OSS or on a voting server with
   Consul Enterprise, it's _possible_ that the WAL could cause corruption of
   that server's state (with the caveats above) _and then_ become the leader and
   replicate that corruption to all other servers.

Or is this more related to the fact then even in case it goes all good users with one server will have downtime?

To be safe the real requirement is to be able to use non-voting servers aka to use Consul Enterprise

## Procedure to enable WAL on one server

**1. Enable log verification (new in 1.15).**

This needs to be enabled on any voting server in Enterprise and all servers in
OSS since it is the leader that writes verification checkpoints.

On each voting server add the following to the server's configuration file:

```hcl
raft_logstore {
  verification {
    enabled = true
    interval = "60s"
  }
}
```

You'll need to restart each server in turn for that to take effect (`consul
reload` is not sufficient). Wait for each one to become a healthy voter again
using `consul operator raft list-peers` before moving on to the next. This can
take a few minutes if the snapshot is large.

You should now see log entries on the servers every minute that look like this:

```
2023-01-31T14:44:31.174Z [INFO]  agent.server.raft.logstore.verifier: verification checksum OK: elapsed=488.463268ms leaderChecksum=f15db83976f2328c rangeEnd=357802 rangeStart=298132 readChecksum=f15db83976f2328c
```

**2. Select a server to enable WAL on.**

As noted in [Risks](#risks), Consul Enterprise users should select a non-voting
server at first. For Consul OSS users, or Enterprise users who don't have

> non-voting servers, select one of the follower servers.

Reviewer 2: Shall we hint on the fact that ENT users could test it by adding a new non-voting server in case they don't have one deployed yet? This will reduce their risks.

```shell-session
$ consul operator raft list-peers
```

We'll refer to this server as the "target" server from now on.

**3. Stop the target server gracefully**

For example using `systemctl stop consul` if using systemd.

~> If you have any configuration management automation like Chef or Puppet that
might interfere with this process, they must be disabled until the process is
complete.

**4. Remove the data directory from the target server.**

Moving rather than deleting is less destructive in case of command errors. Once
the server has restarted though, the data in the old dir should not be used for
recovery and will eventually need to be removed entirely.

Replace `/data-dir` with whatever is set in `data_dir` in your configuration
file.

```shell-session
$ mv /data-dir/raft /data-dir/raft.bak
```

**5. Update the target server's configuration.**

Add the following to the target server's configuration file:

```hcl
raft_logstore {
  backend = "wal"
  verification {
    enabled = true
    interval = "60s"
  }
}
```

**6. Start the target server.**

For example with `systemctl start consul` if using systemd.

**7. Monitor target server raft metrics and logs.**

> See the section below on [monitoring WAL tests](#monitoring-wal-tests).

Reviewer 2: The link does not work.

Maybe `(#monitoring)` is the one you meant.

follow the [revert to BoltDB procedure](#procedure-to-revert-to-boltdb). If the
server is already using BoltDB, the same is true although this is likely to
indicate a latent bug in BoltDB or a bug in our verification code that needs to
be investigated.

Please report all verification failures via a [GitHub
issue](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=bug_report.md&title=WAL:%20Checksum%20Failure).

It would really help us if you can include:
 - Details of your server cluster configuration and hardware
 - Logs around the failure message
 - Context for how long they have been running the configuration
 - Any metrics or description of the workload you have, e.g. how many raft
   commits per second as well as the performance metrics described below

~> We recommend setting up an alert on Consul server logs containing
`verification checksum FAILED` or on the
`consul.raft.logstore.verifier.{read|write}_checksum_failures` metrics. The
sooner a corrupt server is handled, the lower the chance of any of the
[potential risks](#risks) causing problems in your cluster.

### Performance Metrics

The key performance metrics to watch are:

> * `consul.raft.commitTime` measures the time to commit new writes on a quorum of
>   servers. It should be the same or lower after deploying WAL. Even if WAL is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `consul.raft.commitTime` measures the time to commit new writes on a quorum of
  servers. It should be the same or lower after deploying WAL. Even if WAL is
```

In [telemetry.mdx](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/16270/files#diff-8d2b6d7521b66ab4359f6ccd7e79e955c168d5f3b9d9066b76236ebc782377ab) we use a different definition:

> Measures the time it takes to commit a new entry to the Raft log on the leader.

It might be better to reuse the same definition.

  faster for your workload and hardware, it may not be reflected in commitTime
  until enough followers are using it that the leader doesn't have to wait for a
  slower one (one in a cluster of three, two in a cluster of five etc.).

* `consul.raft.rpc.appendEntries.storeLogs` measures the time spent persisting
  logs to disk on each _follower_. It should be the same or lower for

>   WAL-enabled followers.

Reviewer 2: In [telemetry.mdx](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/16270/files#diff-8d2b6d7521b66ab4359f6ccd7e79e955c168d5f3b9d9066b76236ebc782377ab) we use a different definition:

> Measures the time taken to add any outstanding logs for an agent, since the last appendEntries was invoked

Author: I feel like the extra specificity here is useful in terms of what it means for WAL. The one in telemetry is arguably misleading even - it's only emitted by a follower, it's not "any outstanding logs" but just whatever the next batch the leader choose to send is (and there may be multiple in flight at once) and "since the last appendEntries..." is just wrong. it's the time from recieving an append entries RPC to responding to it. If the previous one was 30s ago it won't suddenly jump up to 30s... Maybe we should just fix the `telemetry.mdx` definition?

* `consul.raft.replication.appendEntries.rpc` measures the time taken for each

>   `AppendEntries` RPC from the leader's perspective. If this is significantly

Reviewer 2: In [telemetry.mdx](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/16270/files#diff-8d2b6d7521b66ab4359f6ccd7e79e955c168d5f3b9d9066b76236ebc782377ab) we use a different definition:

> Measures the time taken by the append entries RFC, to replicate the log entries of a leader agent onto its follower agent(s)

  higher than `consul.raft.rpc.appendEntries` on the follower, it indicates a
  known queuing issue in our raft library that will be fixed soon and is
  essentially unrelated to the backend. The follower(s) with WAL enabled should
  not be slower than the others. You can work out which follower each metric is
  for by matching the `peer_id` label value to the server IDs listed by `consul
  operator raft list-peers`.

> * `consul.raft.compactLogs` measures the time take to truncate the logs after a

Reviewer 2: I could not find this in [telemetry.mdx](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/16270/files#diff-8d2b6d7521b66ab4359f6ccd7e79e955c168d5f3b9d9066b76236ebc782377ab).

Should it be there too?

  snapshot. WAL-enabled servers should not be slower than BoltDB ones.

* `consul.raft.leader.dispatchLog` measures the time spent persisting logs to

>   disk on the _leader_. It is only relevant if a WAL-enabled server becomes a

Reviewer 2: In [telemetry.mdx](https://github.com/hashicorp/consul/pull/16270/files#diff-8d2b6d7521b66ab4359f6ccd7e79e955c168d5f3b9d9066b76236ebc782377ab) we use a different definition:

> Measures the time it takes for the leader to write log entries to disk.
